---
title: Object Oriented Programming (OOP)
date: 2024-06-08 11:10:00 +1200
categories: [Software, OOP]
tags: [Principle]
---

# What is OOP?

OOP (Object-Oriented Programming) is the industry-defining programming paradigm. Everyone from startups to major enterprise corporations uses it. It describes software in terms of small, reusable fragments known as objects that communicate by passing messages throughout the code.

# Misconception

Many misconceptions arise due to the misleading name. It has "objects" in the name, so people think, "If I'm using objects, I'm doing OOP." But there's much more to it. OOP is a design philosophy that requires changing every natural instinct and thought process to align with OOP principles.

OOP languages are very flexible. Functional languages only allow Functional Programming, and SmallTalk only allows OOP. However, languages like C# and Java allow multiple paradigms. This flexibility is both a blessing and a curse: a blessing because it makes the languages applicable to many people with different use cases, and a curse because it can lead people down unproductive paths. The most natural way of thinking about software is the procedural paradigm: you have some data, you apply logic to the data to get an output. This is not OOP.

# The Truth

OOP is the act of combining data and behavior. Objects have both and are passed around as such. Instead of creating that stateless, static service, or an object that acts only as a data structure with no behavior, try combining the two.
