---
title: Database
date: 2024-06-11 11:10:00 +1200
categories: [Software, Database]
tags: [Principle]
---

# What is a Database

A database is one solution to the problem of data storage. Without data, nothing is stored or maintained. A rudimentary question would be, "Why not use your good old handy file?" Files have different use cases and are better suited for various purposes. They are stored as plain text, easy to read and write, and are good for the average user wanting to save some text they've written. However, applications need a more robust system, one which can handle millions of concurrent connections, and is resilient, available, and consistent. This is what a database is designed to provide.

# RDBMS (Relation DataBase Management System)

The most popular database type currently is the RDBMS, which stores data in tables and rows. You can define relationships between tables using foreign keys and joins to manipulate the data as you wish. They all use the industry-standard SQL language to communicate with the database. RDBMS is a family of databases, with popular implementations including PostgreSQL, MySQL, and Microsoft SQL Server. These services provide similar high-level functionality but have many differences in details. Like a lemonade stand, the quality of lemons, the number of staff, and the size of the store all contribute to customer satisfaction.

# ORM (Object Relational Mapping)

The relational system brings its own challenges. Although it is great for performance and usability, compatibility issues may arise. An OO domain model is not 1-to-1 compatible with a relational model. For example, there is no way to represent lists natively. Building an in-house system to smooth out the flow between the software domain and the database is known as an ORM. ORMs are complicated and have weird gotchas and complexities. It is not recommended to build your own. That is why many fantastic ORMs exist, such as EFCore for C#.

# NoSQL (Not Only SQL)

Recently, there has been a big rise in coveted NoSQL databases, said to be the new hot thing and possibly replacing relational databases for good. NoSQL uses a document model where you can store the domain object as-is into the database as JSON. This allows a consistent model over the two most complicated parts of your software architecture. Fantastic! No need for ORMs. No need to construct a well-thought-out relational model and figure out how to move it in and out of memory. Examples include MongoDB. Of course, many trade-offs exist.
